Black holes are volumes of space where gravity is extreme enough to prevent the escape of even the fastest moving particles. Not even light can break free, hence the name 'black' hole.A German physicist and astronomer named Karl Schwarzschild proposed the modern version of a black hole in 1915 after coming up with an exact solution to Einstein's approximations of general relativity. Schwarzschild realised it was possible for mass to be squeezed into an infinitely small point. This would make spacetime around it bend so that nothing – not even massless photons of light – could escape its curvature.
The cusp of the black hole's slide into oblivion is today referred to as its event horizon, and the distance between this boundary and the infinitely dense core – or singularity – is named after Schwarzschild.Theoretically, all masses have a Schwarzschild radius that can be calculated. If the Sun's mass was squeezed into an infinitely small point, it would form a black hole with a radius of just under 3 kilometres (about 2 miles).Similarly, Earth's mass would have a Schwarzschild radius of just a few millimetres, making a black hole no bigger than a marble.For decades, black holes were exotic peculiarities of general relativity. Physicists have became increasingly confident in their existence as other extreme astronomical objects, such as neutron stars, were discovered. Today it's believed most galaxies have monstrous black holes at their core.
How do they form?
It's generally accepted that stars with a mass at least 3 times greater than that of our Sun's can undergo extreme gravitational collapse once their fuel depletes.With so much mass in a confined volume, the collective force of gravity overcomes the rule that usually keeps the building blocks of atoms from occupying the same space. All this density creates a black hole.A second type of miniature black hole has been hypothesised, though never observed. They're thought to have formed when the rippling vacuum of the early Universe rapidly expanded in an event known as inflation, causing highly dense regions to collapse.Called primordial black holes, they'd have a smaller mass – some even close to that of Earth – but would be little bigger than a jelly bean. Supermassive black holes with the mass of many millions of stars are thought to lie at the center of most large galaxies. The evidence comes from optical and radio observations which show a sharp rise in the velocities of stars or gas clouds orbiting the centers of galaxies. High orbital velocities mean that something massive is creating a powerful gravitational field which is accelerating the stars. X-ray observations indicate that a large amount of energy is produced in the centers of many galaxies, presumably by the in-fall of matter into a black hole.

GRAVITATIONAL WAVE
Gravitational waves are ripples in space-time (the fabled “fabric” of the Universe) caused by massive objects moving with extreme accelerations. In outer space that means objects like neutron stars or black holes orbiting around each other at ever increasing rates, or stars that blow themselves up.The gravitational waves were detected on September 14, 2015 at 5:51 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time (09:51 UTC) by both of the twin Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) detectors, located in Livingston, Louisiana, and Hanford, Washington, USA. The LIGO Observatories are funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF), and were conceived, built, and are operated by Caltech and MIT. The discovery, accepted for publication in the journal Physical Review Letters, was made by the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (which includes the GEO Collaboration and the Australian Consortium for Interferometric Gravitational Astronomy) and the Virgo Collaboration using data from the two LIGO detectors.According to general relativity, a pair of black holes orbiting around each other lose energy through the emission of gravitational waves, causing them to gradually approach each other over billions of years, and then much more quickly in the final minutes.
