Life is all around us. Dive into the deepest bottom of the ocean, climb the highest mountains of the world or simply stay where you are. The entire Earth swarms with billions and billions living organisms. However, the vast majority of life is invisible to the naked eye and can be found on places you would have never expected. Wherever you are right now, it is almost certain that each square centimeter of all objects around you is inhabited by many primitive bacteria, miniature fungi and other various creatures. Every time you go to bed, you can say hello to the hundreds of thousands of tiny dust mites, who made your bed their permanent home. Or you can get acquainted with billions of microorganisms living on the surface of your body – on each of us, there are actually more organisms than there are people on the entire planet.
Considering how incredibly common life is here on Earth and how often we encounter it, we know ruefully little about it. Scientists estimate that our planet is a haven for staggering several million species. However, as of today we are acquainted with “just” one million organisms. That is to say that the majority of all organisms who are sharing this tiny planet with us have never been observed and are still awaiting their discovery.

However, science has to deal with another issue – the effort to describe what life actually is. Defining life has turned out to be much more complicated than it might seem at first glance. It is difficult to find a common defining element for all objects we consider to be alive when they are so different from each other – you would hardly find a similarity between a human and a dandelion.

But there is one thing we know for sure. Life is, just like everything else, part of the universe, so it has to obey its laws. In its essence, every living organism is just a collection of complicated molecules arranged in a unique way that makes the organism what it is. In other words, life is not anything magical as people used to think – on the molecular level, it is composed of the same inanimate stuff as everything else.

And scientific research seems so suggest that all of this applies to the species Homo sapiens as well. For millennia, humans have considered themselves to be something more than other organisms, which is actually not that surprising. In a way, we are a unique species – we can communicate using complex languages, create art, build magnificent structures, and many more things other organisms could only dream about. Therefore, it should not be startling for us that people living before the scientific epoch presumed that we must be special and superior to everything else. But is seems that science conveys an entirely different message. Just like all other organisms, we are a product of evolution. And just like all matter in the cosmos, we are composed of atoms and molecules. In other words, you, a dust mite in your bed, and a favorite toy from your childhood are more similar than you might think.

Today, life is defined somewhat clumsily by the following features – every living organism is composed of one or more cells, reproduces, uses energy to its maintenance, grows, adapts to its environment and is subject to evolution.

But right at the first feature (life is composed of cells), we come upon a problem. This problem is brought by objects known as viruses, notorious for causing lots of diseases. Viruses are actually not composed of cells – most of them are much smaller than even the simplest prokaryotic cell. But are they alive, or do they belong into the inanimate world? To answer this question, we first need to learn a bit more about them.

The origin of viruses has been a mystery for many years. Some scientists have long assumed that they originated independently of cells. That is actually not very unreasonable – viruses and cells are nothing alike. Viruses only consist of a tiny package of genetic information wrapped into a membrane. On top of that, they are, unlike cells, unable to extract energy from their environment. You may wonder – how do they survive, then? The answer is simple – they parasite inside cells.
DNA determines the exact appearance of every living organism. Your DNA tells your cells how to behave – the cells in your nails are supposed to obediently divide, the protective cells of your immune system should vigilantly look for unwanted visitors, and red blood cells’ task is to transport oxygen throughout your entire body and thus keep it going. Every organism is just a collection of tiny cellular servants who obediently perform everything the all-powerful DNA orders them. When your DNA says that you are supposed to have brown eyes, the cells in your iris are required to make it happen by producing a large amount of a pigment called melanin. When your DNA thinks it would be a better idea to have blue eyes, the cells produce a bit less melanin.Every organism you see around you (and even countless those you cannot see) is a product of a single successful evolutionary line. All of its ancestors have managed to pass on their genetic information to their descendants. It is fascinating when we realize that if just one of our ancestors failed, we would not be here at all. Every one of us is a product of many happy coincidences, without which we would not even have been born. In other words, if one of your fish ancestors were ruthlessly consumed by a hungry shark the day he was preparing to procreate another of your ancestors, the entire evolutionary chain would be irreversibly broken and your existence would simply be impossible.